Configuring the TLC (Tape Library Controler)
============================================

This section explains how to configure the TLC for a specific library. As Phobos
can handle multiple library, there should be a TLC instance for each library.
Each TLC should have its own section in the configuration file using the
following format: **[tlc %s]**. Here, "%s" should be replaced with the name of
the library. If there is only one TLC, the library's name should be the same as
the default library name.

*Library device*
----------------

The **lib_device** parameter defines the path of the library changer for the TLC
server. This is a **critical parameter** as it tells the TLC where to find the
device it needs to control.

If this parameter is not specified, Phobos defaults to the following:
**lib_device = /dev/changer**.

Example:

.. code:: ini

    [tlc "legacy"]
    lib_device = /dev/changer

*Listen hostname*
-----------------

The **listen_hostname** parameter defines the hostname to which the server
should bind. If this parameter is not specified, the TLC will use the value of
the parameter **hostname** to bind to. This parameter allows a different
internal bind than the hostname. This is useful with a load balancer who listens
on **hostname** and then redirects on **listen_hostname**.

If this parameter is not specified, Phobos will use the **hostname**.

Example:

.. code:: ini

    [tlc "legacy"]
    listen_hostname = 0.0.0.0

*Listen interface*
------------------

The **listen_interface** parameter defines the network interface to which the
server should bind. This can be used to restrict the server to a specific
network interface.

If this parameter is not specified, Phobos defaults to the following:
**listen_interface = null**.

Example:

.. code:: ini

    [tlc "legacy"]
    listen_interface = admin0

*Listen port*
-------------

The **listen_port** parameter defines the port number to which the server should
bind. This is useful for load balancing.

If this parameter is not specified, Phobos will use the **port**.

Example:

.. code:: ini

    [tlc "legacy"]
    listen_port = 20123

*Hostname*
----------

The **hostname** parameter defines the server address for the TLC. This address
will be used by the TLC's clients (the phobosd daemon instance) to communicate
with the TLCs. Also, if **listen_hostname** is not specified, the TLC will use
the **hostname** to bind to.

If this parameter is not specified, Phobos defaults to the following:
**hostname = localhost**.

Example:

.. code:: ini

    [tlc "legacy"]
    hostname = localhost

*Port*
------

The **port** parameter defines the port number on which the TLC server is
listening.

If this parameter is not specified, Phobos defaults to the following:
**port = 20123**.

Example:

.. code:: ini

    [tlc "legacy"]
    port = 20123
